url: https://faolex.fao.org/docs/pdf/nep186567E.pdf

date: 2024-05-06T16:32:27+02:00

www.lawcommission.gov.np 
1 
 
The Right to Food and Food Sovereignty Act, 2075 (2018) 
Date of Authentication 
2075.6.2 (18 September 2018) 
 
Act number 13 of the year 2075 (2018) 
An Act Made to Provide for Right to Food and Food Sovereignty 
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to make legal provisions on the implementation of 
fundamental rights relating to food, food security and food sovereignty of the citizens, 
conferred by the Constitution of Nepal, and making appropriate mechanism therefor, and 
ensuring access of the citizens to foods; 
Now, therefore, be it enacted by the Federal Parliament. 
 
Chapter-1 
Preliminary 
1. 
Short Title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the "Right to Food 
and Food Sovereignty Act, 2075 (2018)." 
(2) This Act shall come into force immediately. 
2. 
Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in this Act,- 
(a) 
"Basic food" means the food designated by the Government of Nepal 
by a notification in the Nepal Gazette from time to time. 
(b) 
"Farmer" means a citizen who makes agriculture the main occupation 
or business and earns his or her livelihood from agriculture, and this 
term also includes the family member dependent on such a citizen, or 
the citizen who labors in agricultural work for six months or more, or 
a citizen who makes traditional agricultural tools or the family 
member dependent on such a citizen. 
(c) 
"Agricultural land" means any land that is used for agriculture, that 
grows agro products, or that is determined for the utility in 
agricultural work under the prevailing law. 
(d) 
"Food" means a substance that is processed, semi- processed or 
unprocessed consumable by the human being, obtained from 
biological source which is culturally acceptable, and this term also

www.lawcommission.gov.np 
2 
 
includes a raw material used in the preparation, processing or 
production of such a substance. 
(e) 
"Food sovereignty" means the following rights which are used or 
exercised by the farmers in the food production and distribution 
system: 
(1) 
To participate in the process of formulation of policy relating 
to food, 
(2) 
To make choice of any occupation relating to food production 
or distribution system, 
(3) 
To make choice of agricultural land, labor, seeds, technology, 
tools, 
(4) 
To remain free from adverse impact of globalization or 
commercialization of agricultural business. 
(f) 
"Food security" means physical and financial access of every person 
to the food required for the active and healthy human life. 
(g) 
"Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as prescribed in 
the rules framed under this Act. 
(h) 
"Council" means the National Food Council referred to in Section 32. 
(i) 
"Ministry" means the Ministry of the Government of Nepal that looks 
after the matters relating to agriculture. 
(j) 
"Targetted household" means the households identified pursuant to 
Section 5. 
(k) 
"Local Level" means the Rural Municipality or Municipality. 
 
Chapter-2 
Right to Food and Protection from Food Insecurity 
3.  
Respect, protection and fulfillment of the right to food: (1) Every citizen shall 
have the right to food and right to food security. 
(2) The Government of Nepal, Provincial Government and Local Level shall 
make necessary arrangements, with mutual coordination, for the respect, protection 
and fulfillment of the right referred to in sub-section (1). 
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1), every citizen shall 
have the following rights relating to food and rights relating to food security:

www.lawcommission.gov.np 
3 
 
(a) 
To have regular access, without discrimination, to adequate, 
nutritious and quality food, 
(b) 
To be free from the hunger, 
(c) 
To be safe from the state of being in danger of life from the scarcity 
of food, 
(d) 
To obtain sustainable access to food and nutrition support by the 
persons or families vulnerable to famine or food insecurity, 
(e) 
To use culturally acceptable food. 
4.  
Prevention and control of famine: The Government of Nepal, Provincial 
Government and Local Level shall perform the following functions, on the basis of 
prioritization, with mutual coordination, for the prevention and control of famine: 
(a) 
To regularly identify famine or the person, families, communities and 
zones vulnerable to the famine; and to maintain its records, 
(b) 
To make provisions of food required for controlling famine and the 
risk of famine, 
(c) 
To make provision for food distribution for controlling the famine or 
the risk of famine, 
(d) 
To adopt immediate, short-term and long-term measures for the 
prevention and control of the famine. 
5. 
Identification of targeted household: (1) The Local level shall maintain records 
in the prescribed form by identifying the targeted households, as prescribed, within 
its territory, that are vulnerable to food insecurity due to poverty, geographical 
inaccessibility, disaster or similar other reasons. 
(2) The details of the records referred to in sub-section (1) shall be sent to 
the Provincial Food Council pursuant to Section 34 and also to the Ministry for the 
record purpose. 
(3) If the details of the households which are not prone to food insecurity are 
found to have been included in the records referred to in sub-section (1), or if the 
households included in the records do not fall under the targeted households for any 
reason whatsoever, the Local Level may remove the details of such family from the 
records in any circumstance. 
(4) On the basis of the records received pursuant to sub-section (2), every 
Province shall maintain the integrated and updated records of the targeted

www.lawcommission.gov.np 
4 
 
households that are vulnerable to the food insecurity within its Province and the 
Ministry shall prepare such records of such households throughout Nepal. 
(5) The records referred to in this Section shall be updated by the Local Level 
from time to time, and its information shall be provided to the Province Food 
Council and Government of Nepal. 
(6) The Government of Nepal may develop necessary system to maintain the 
records referred to in this Section also through electronic means. 
(7) Other grounds and processes of identifying the targeted households shall 
be as prescribed. 
6.  
Food support identity card: (1) The Local Level shall issue food support identity 
cards in the prescribed form on the basis of updated details of the targeted 
households. 
(2) While issuing the identity cards pursuant to sub-section (1), the food 
support identity cards shall be issued as prescribed in the name of the senior most 
female member of the targeted households if there are female members over 
eighteen years of age, and in the names of the senior most of the other family 
members if there is no female member over eighteen years of age. 
Provided that when there is no member over eighteen years of age in the 
targeted family, nothing contained in this sub-section shall prevent from issuing the 
food support identity card in the name of the minor member of such family. 
(3) If the identity card has been issued in the name of other member referred 
to in sub-section (2), after the female member attains the eighteen years of age, the 
identity card shall be issued in the name of the female member by revoking the 
identity card issued in the name of such a member. 
7.  
To provide food for free or concessional price: (1) The Government of Nepal, 
Provincial Government or Local Level shall provide food support to the targeted 
households for concessional price and to the targeted households of particular 
nature for free as prescribed. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in cases where 
the Government of Nepal declares a disastrous zone upon emerging any kind of 
disaster in any region or any Local Level, the persons and families in such a zone 
shall be provided with food support, for free or at the concessional price, for the 
period of existence of such condition, and for the period of existence of the food 
crisis if the food crisis zone is declared.

www.lawcommission.gov.np 
5 
 
 
(3) While providing food support, for free or at the concessional price, 
pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the Government of Nepal shall make arrangement 
to distribute it through the Local Level. 
 
(4) The Government of Nepal, Provincial Government or Local Level may 
review the free or concessional food support to be provided pursuant to this Section, 
form and quantity of such food support from time to time, on the basis of immediate 
need of the persons or families of the zones prescribed, geographical condition, 
availability and traditionally or culturally acceptability of food. 
8.  
To prescribe standards of nutritious elements of food: The standards of the 
nutritious elements of food required for the purpose of providing food support 
pursuant to Section 7 shall be as prescribed. 
9. 
Emergency food and nutrition security: (1) The Government of Nepal, Provincial 
Government and Local Level shall adopt necessary measures with mutual 
coordination in order to reduce adverse impact likely to occur in food and nutrition 
security for any reason and to provide food immediately in the emergency situation. 
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term "emergency situation" 
means the period declared by the Government of Nepal as a situation of emergency 
at any zone affected by the disaster such as earthquake, flood, landslide, snowfall, 
cold wave or inferno. 
(2) The Government of Nepal, Provincial Government and Local Level shall 
hoard the food required to fulfill the necessity of nutrition in any situation 
whatsoever, by expanding and modernizing their storage facilities with mutual 
coordination. 
(3) The prescribed body shall coordinate the functions of providing 
emergency food and nutrition support pursuant to this Section. 
(4) The Government of Nepal may, in order to enhance the security situation 
of food and nutrition during the situation of emergency, mobilize national and 
international support, as necessary. 
10.  
Food crisis zone may be declared: (1) If there arises a food crisis in any zone due 
to reasons such as earthquake, excessive rainfall, low rainfall, flood, landslide, 
inferno, epidemic, famine, the Government of Nepal may declare such a zone as a 
food crisis zone for a certain period. 
(2) The arrangements relating to the security of food and nutrition required 
in the food crisis zone shall be as prescribed.

www.lawcommission.gov.np 
6 
 
11. 
To give priority to local food: (1) While making arrangements for food and 
nutrition pursuant to this Act, traditional food produced in the Local Level shall be 
prioritized and distributed. 
(2) The provisions relating to arrangements for traditional food and nutrition 
produced in the Local Level shall be as prescribed. 
 
Chapter-3 
Protection and Promotion of Right to Food Sovereignty 
12. 
Respect, protection and fulfillment of right to food sovereignty: (1) Every 
farmer shall have the right to food sovereignty. 
 
 
(2)  Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1), every farmer shall 
have the following rights to food sovereignty: 
(a) 
To have identity and respect of every farmer or food producer, 
 
 
(b) 
To participate in food and agro- production system, 
(c) 
To have access to means and resources required for agricultural 
business, 
(d) 
To make choice of local seeds, technology, tools and agro- species 
and to obtain the protection of intellectual property, thereof, 
(e) 
To protect traditional and indigenous food, 
(f) 
To obtain protection against the deprivation of agricultural 
occupation arbitrarily. 
13. 
Protection of agricultural occupation and promotion of livelihood of the 
farmer: The Government of Nepal, Provincial Government and Local Level shall 
make the following arrangements, with mutual coordination, on the basis of 
available resources and means in order to promote the livelihood of the farmers, by 
protecting agricultural occupation: 
(a) 
To increase investment in the agro and food production sector, 
(b) 
To expand the sustainable use of and access to improved technology, 
environment friendly fertilizers, various types of seeds, pesticides or 
agricultural materials in food production, 
(c) 
To give special priority to cash crops or exportable crops, 
(d) 
To expand simple and easy access of the farmers to the insurance of 
seeds, crops or livestock, 
(e) 
To increase access of the farmers to agro markets,

www.lawcommission.gov.np 
7 
 
(f) 
To expand access of the farmers to infrastructures needed for organic 
farming, 
(g) 
To obtain protection from the harm inflicted by the farming of 
chemical, toxic or genetically modified organism, 
(h) 
To fix minimum support price of the prescribed crops that can be 
hoarded for a longer period, 
(i)  
To develop the system of giving prior information about weather 
including excessive rainfall, less rainfall or draught, 
(j) 
To promote sustainable agricultural system based on bio-diversity, 
(k) 
To professionalize, industrialize, modernize, mechanicalize the 
agriculture in order to protect agricultural occupation, 
(l) 
To expand access of women farmers and landless families dependent 
on agriculture to agricultural land and agricultural materials, on the 
basis of priority, 
(m) 
To prevent the water resources used for the agricultural crops, fruits 
and the livestock from being otherwise used to make unsuitable for 
such products, 
(n) 
To make arrangements to provide the farmers with compensation as 
prescribed, during the prescribed situations against harm and loss of 
agro products or agro crops,  
(o) 
To fix support price of the agro products based on the investment 
cost. 
14. 
Identification and respect of farmers: (1) The Government of Nepal shall identify 
and classify the farmers as prescribed. 
 
 
(2) The Local Level shall distribute the identity cards on the basis of 
classification referred to in sub-section (1). 
 
 
(3) On the basis of the classification referred to in sub-section (1), the 
farmers shall be provided with concession, exemption, facility to be obtained from 
the State and pension based on contribution in accordance with the prevailing law. 
 
 
(4) Provisions relating to the validity period, renewal of the identity cards 
and other matters related thereto shall be as prescribed. 
15. 
Sustainable use of agricultural land: For the protection and sustainable use of 
agricultural land, the Government of Nepal, Provincial Government and Local 
Level shall, with mutual coordination, perform the following functions:

www.lawcommission.gov.np 
8 
 
(a) 
To encourage or promote to plant crops in the agricultural lands 
identified under the prevailing law, 
(b) 
To separate or classify by identifying the agricultural lands 
scientifically, 
(c) 
Not to allow or get the agricultural lands to remain fallow and to be 
used for the purpose other than that prescribed under the prevailing 
law regarding the use of land,  
(d) 
Not to allow plotting of the agricultural lands, 
(e) 
To carry out development works in a manner not to be contrary to the 
National Food Plan referred to in Section 21, 
(f) 
To increase awareness about the use of agricultural lands, 
(g) 
To cut down the grant, facility and support to be provided by the 
Government for the landowners who do not plant crops without 
reasonable cause in the lands classified for the purpose of agriculture, 
(h) 
To make provisions for the maximum utilization of fertile lands 
remained fallow, by promoting cooperative farming, bond farming, 
contract farming or group farming, 
16. 
Promotion of local agro- crops and livestock products: The Government of 
Nepal, Provincial Government and Local Level shall, in order to promote the local 
agro- crops and livestock products, adopt the following measures: 
 
 
(a) 
To promote local agro and livestock products and markets, 
(b) 
To ensure easy access of consumers to local agro and livestock 
products, 
(c) 
To create an environment for selling their products by the farmers to 
the consumers from agro markets, agricultural farms or farmlands, 
(d) 
To promote traditional agro markets and marketplaces, 
(e) 
To protect local knowledge and traditional food culture related to 
agro products, 
(f) 
To promote the agro tourism by utilizing the food produced at the 
local level. 
17. 
Responsibility of sustainable management of agricultural land: (1) The Local 
Level shall have the responsibility to conduct sustainable management of 
agricultural lands subject to the Federal and Provincial law.

www.lawcommission.gov.np 
9 
 
 
 
(2) In order to fulfill the responsibility referred to in sub-section (1), the 
Local Level shall perform the following functions: 
 
 
(a) 
To prepare the list of agricultural lands,  
(b) 
To identify the fallow lands and other land remained at the Local 
Level, 
(c) 
To maintain the records of the lands identified pursuant to clauses (a) 
and (b), 
 
 
(d) 
To update the records relating to land, 
(e) 
To perform, or cause to be performed such other functions as required 
to manage the fallow lands effectively. 
18. 
Operation of targeted agricultural development program: (1) The Government 
of Nepal, Provincial Government and Local Level shall make and implement the 
targeted agricultural development programmes for the protection of the rights and 
welfare of Dalit, highly marginalized, indigenous farmers or landless farmers.
 
 
 
(2) Other provisions relating to the program referred to in sub-section (1) 
shall be as prescribed. 
19. 
Mitigation of impact likely to be caused from climate change: The Government 
of Nepal shall make necessary provisions to adopt preventive measures for the 
mitigation of adverse impacts likely to be caused upon food production from climate 
change or of the risks that may result therefrom.   
20. 
To provide compensation: (1) If a person's crops do not get produced or crop 
production decreases substantially after farming with the recommended method, 
process or manner in the recommended area and time with the seeds recommended 
by any government institution, body, company or firm, or after the use of seeds, 
method, process or fertilizers recommended by such an institution, body, company 
or firm as per recommended manner, the institution, agency, company or firm which 
makes recommendation of such seeds, method, process or fertilizers shall provide 
compensation. 
 
 
(2) Other provisions for the compensation to be provided pursuant to sub-
section (1) shall be as prescribed. 
 
Chapter-4 
Implementation of Right to Food

www.lawcommission.gov.np 
10 
 
21. 
National Food Plan: (1) The Government of Nepal shall prepare a National Food 
Plan upon coordinating with the bodies of the Federation, Province and Local Level 
related to food. 
(2) While making coordination under sub-section (1), consultation shall be 
held, as necessary, with other bodies or institutions of the governmental, non-
governmental or private level. 
(3) The matters to be included in the National Food Plan referred to in sub-
section (1) shall be as prescribed. 
(4) While preparing the National Food Plan pursuant to sub-section (1), the 
indicators of measurement and monitoring of the progress made during the 
implementation of the right to food shall be taken as the basis. 
(5) The Government of Nepal shall include the matters of promotion of the 
right to food, food and nutrition security and food sovereignty in its periodic 
development plans. 
22. 
Operation of food and nutrition security program: The Local Level shall operate 
necessary programs as prescribed every year for food and nutrition security.  
23. 
Indicators of right to food monitoring: (1) The Government of Nepal shall, in 
order to implement this Act, prepare monitoring indicators for the right to food and 
the right to food sovereignty, in consultation with the Council and other relevant 
bodies.  
(2) The monitoring indicators for the right referred to in sub-section (1) shall 
be published for the information of the public in general. 
24. 
Food and nutrition education and information: The Government of Nepal, 
Provincial Government and Local Level shall disseminate the notice and 
educational information related to the right to food from time to time. 
25.  
Research and development of scientific technology: In order to make sustainable 
development of agriculture, increase food products or promote food and nutrition 
security, the Government of Nepal, Provincial Government and Local Level shall 
make arrangement for the necessary study, research and development of scientific 
technology. 
 
Chapter-5 
Availability, Supply and Distribution System of Food

www.lawcommission.gov.np 
11 
 
26. 
Provision of hoarding and reservation of food: The Government of Nepal and 
Provincial Government shall, in order to provide food and to fulfill the necessity of 
food during the crisis, make provisions for the reservation of foods as prescribed, 
for the purpose of Sections 7, 9 or 10.  
27. 
Food purchase: (1) The food required for the storage and reservation pursuant to 
Section 26 shall be purchased internally. 
 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), food may be 
imported if the sufficient food cannot be provided from the internal purchase. 
28. 
Transport and distribution of food: The distribution process of the food stored 
and reserved by the Government of Nepal and Provincial Government pursuant to 
Section 26 shall be as prescribed. 
29. 
Price stability of basic food: It shall be the responsibility of the Government of 
Nepal to maintain stability in the price of the basic food. 
30. 
Provision of food distribution: (1) The Government of Nepal, Provincial 
Government and Local Level shall make arrangement for food distribution through 
fair price shops or public food distribution centers as prescribed. 
 
 
(2) While operating fair price shops or public food distribution centers 
pursuant to Sub-section (1), women group or agricultural cooperative may be given 
special priority. 
31. 
To publish description: (1) The Government of Nepal, Provincial Government or 
Local Level shall prepare and update the following details regarding the food to be 
distributed pursuant to this Chapter: 
 
 
(a) 
Condition of food hoarded, 
 
 
(b) 
Quantity of food hoarded, 
 
 
(c) 
Price of food, 
 
 
(d) 
Distribution system of food, and 
 
 
(e) 
Type of food. 
 
 
(2) The details referred to in sub-section (1) shall be published for the 
information of the public in general. 
 
Chapter-6 
National Food Council, Provincial Food Council and  
Local Food Coordination Committee

www.lawcommission.gov.np 
12 
 
32. 
Formation of National Food Council: (1) In order to manage the acts of protection, 
promotion and fulfillment of the right to food, right relating to food security and 
food sovereignty, a National Food Council shall be formed as prescribed, under the 
chairpersonship of the Minister of the Government of Nepal, who looks after the 
matters relating to agriculture. 
(2) The functions, duties and powers of the Council shall be as prescribed. 
33. 
Monitoring and inspection: (1) The Council may, for the monitoring and 
inspection of the availability, hoarding, supplies of food and the operation of 
distribution system regularly, form sub-committees or designate the Inspection 
Officer, as prescribed. 
(2) After conducting the monitoring or inspection, the sub-committee or the 
Officer, conducting monitoring or inspection pursuant to sub-section (1), shall 
submit its report to the Council. 
34. 
Provisions relating to Provincial Food Council: (1) In order to protect, promote 
and fulfill the right pursuant to this Act in the Provincial level, a Provincial Food 
Council shall be formed in each Province, under the chairpersonship of the Minister 
who looks after the matters of agriculture. 
(2) Other matters relating to the Provincial Food Council shall be as 
determined by the Provincial Government. 
35. 
Functions, duties and powers of Provincial Food Council: The functions, duties 
and powers of the Provincial Food Council shall be as determined by the Provincial 
Government. 
36. 
Local Food Coordination Committee: (1) For the functions including protection 
and promotion of the right to food, right to food  security and food sovereignty in 
the Local Level, and in order to facilitate food supplies and distribution system in 
the Local Level, a Food Coordination Committee shall be formed in each Local 
Level under the chairpersonship of the Mayor of Municipality or the Chairperson 
of Rural Municipality, as the case may be. 
(2) The Secretariat of the Local Food Coordination Committee shall be 
situated in the concerned Municipality or Rural Municipality, as the case may be. 
(3) The matters relating to the formation, functions, duties and powers of the 
Local Food Coordination Committee shall be as determined by the Local Level 
concerned.

www.lawcommission.gov.np 
13 
 
37. 
 Sub-committee or task force or expert group may be formed: (1) The Council 
or Provincial Food Council may form a sub-committee or task force or expert group 
as necessary for the performance of its functions. 
(2) The terms of reference and tenure of the sub-committee, task force or 
expert group formed pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be as determined by the 
Council at the time of such formation. 
38. 
Delegation of Power: The Council may delegate some of the powers conferred to 
it to the sub-committee or any other officer employee of the Council, as necessary. 
39. 
Provision relating to employee: The Government of Nepal shall provide the 
required employees for the smooth operation of the functions of Council. 
 
Chapter-7 
Offences and Punishment 
40. 
Acts constituting offence: If any person does any of the following acts, such a 
person shall be deemed to have committed the offence: 
(a)  
Any act done to inflict serious harm or create the state of famine by 
depriving anyone of the access to the essential food, 
(b) 
Any act of capturing, destroying or abusing the food hoarded or 
collected for the purpose of emergency support, 
(c) 
Creating obstruction in the emergency food support distribution, 
(d) 
Creating obstruction, in an organized or unorganized manner, in the 
transport, supplies, distribution and marketing of the basic food, 
(e) 
Rendering one homeless in such a manner as to deprive him or her of 
the basis of livelihood, 
(f) 
Not to distribute the food to be distributed pursuant to Section 7 to 
the targeted class or backward class, 
(g) 
Doing any other act contrary to this Act or the rules framed under this 
Act. 
41. 
Investigation and filing case: (1) The investigation of the cases under this Act shall 
be made by the Inspection Officer referred to in Section 44. 
(2) The Inspection Officer referred to in sub-section (1) shall, upon making 
the investigation of the case, file the case in the concerned District Court within 
thirty-five days from the date of receiving the complaint. 
(3) While filing the case pursuant to sub-section (2), the Inspection Officer 
shall obtain opinion of the government attorney.

www.lawcommission.gov.np 
14 
 
42. 
Punishment: A person who commits the offence referred to in Section 40 shall be 
liable to the following punishment, on the basis of the gravity of the offence: 
(a) 
If the offence referred to in clause (a) is committed, or caused to be 
committed, imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and fine 
not exceeding one million rupees,  
(b) 
If the offence referred to in clause (b), (c) or (d) is committed, or 
caused to be committed, imprisonment for a term not exceeding three 
years and fine not exceeding three hundred thousand rupees, 
(c) 
If the offence referred to in clause (e) is committed, or caused to be 
committed, imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and fine 
not exceeding five hundred thousand rupees, 
(d) 
If the offence referred to in clauses (f) and (g) is committed, 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year and fine not 
exceeding one hundred thousand rupees, 
43. 
Compensation: (1) If any kind of harm and injury is caused to any person from the 
commission of any offence under this Act, an application may be made to the case 
trying authority to get compensation paid for such harm and injury. 
(2) The standards relating to the compensation to be provided pursuant to 
sub-section (1) shall be as prescribed. 
Chapter-8 
Miscellaneous 
44. 
 To appoint or designate Inspection Officer: (1) The Ministry may, in order to 
carry out the implementation of this Act and monitoring of the matters relating to 
food effectively, appoint or designate any employee having the qualification as 
prescribed, as the Inspection Officer, as necessary.   
(2) Other matters relating to the Inspection Officer referred to in sub-section 
(1) shall be as prescribed. 
45. 
Liaison with Government of Nepal: The Council shall, while making liaison with 
the Government of Nepal, make liaison through the Ministry. 
46. 
Power to frame rules: The Government of Nepal may frame necessary rules in 
order to implement this Act. 
47. 
To formulate procedures and directives: (1) The Ministry may formulate 
necessary procedures or directives under this Act and the rules framed under this 
Act. 
(2) The procedures or directives formulated pursuant to sub-section (1) shall 
be made public.

